# Publish to Tableau Cloud / Server

When you are ready to make your Hyper file available to other users, you can publish it to Tableau Server or Tableau Cloud.
There are multiple options, depending on whether your file contains a single table or more than one table.

* **Option 1:** Use Tableau Desktop to publish the file as part of either a workbook (a `.twbx` file with an embedded data source) or a separate packaged data source (a `.tdsx` file). For details, see [Publish a Data Source](https://help.tableau.com/current/pro/desktop/en-us/publish_datasources.htm).

* **Option 2:** Use either _tabcmd_, the _Tableau REST API_, or the _Tableau Server Client_ library for Python to programmatically publish the `.hyper` file as is, without packaging it into a data source. Starting with Tableau Server 2021.4, the data model for the data source is generated from the foreign keys in the .hyper file. In particular, a relationship between two tables is generated whenever they are connected with a foreign key. Tableau Server versions 2021.3 and earlier do not support this and thus have the restriction that the file must contain exactly one schema with one table. Additionally, Tableau Server versions 2019.4 and older require both the schema and the table to be named “Extract”; in other words, the qualified name of the single table must be `"Extract"."Extract"` (note the double quotes, since the capitalization matters). This restriction has been removed in Tableau Server 2020.1. See [Publishing a single-table Hyper file directly to Tableau Cloud/Server](https://github.com/tableau/hyper-api-samples/tree/main/Community-Supported/publish-hyper) and [Publishing a multi-table Hyper file to Tableau Cloud/Server ](https://github.com/tableau/hyper-api-samples/tree/main/Community-Supported/publish-multi-table-hyper-legacy) for examples with the Hyper API and the Tableau Server Client library.

* **Option 3:** Manually assemble your own packaged data source by packaging the Hyper file and a corresponding data source (`.tds`) into a single zipped file and changing the file extension from `.zip` to `.tdsx`. The `.tds` file is essentially an XML file that describes the properties (connections, joins, et cetera) of the Hyper extract. Note, however, that Tableau provides no support for this method and no programmatic way to create these files. That said, it is fairly easy to modify an existing saved data source for your purposes. For example, you could use Tableau Desktop to save the `.hyper` file; then, from the _Data_ menu, select the extract, choose _Add to Saved Data Sources_, and edit the saved `.tds` file as appropriate. For an (unsupported) example that programmatically swaps out the file in an existing packaged data source, see [Publishing a Multi-Table Hyper File to Tableau Cloud, Tableau Server](https://github.com/tableau/hyper-api-samples/tree/main/Community-Supported/publish-multi-table-hyper).

As noted, Options 1 and 3 will also work if your Hyper file contains more than one table, but Option 2 will not.
